CHAPTER ONE


He lay flat on the brown, pine-needled floor of the forest, his chin on
his folded arms, and high overhead the wind blew in the tops of the pine
trees. The mountainside sloped gently where he lay; but below it was
steep and he could see the dark of the oiled road winding through the
pass. There was a stream alongside the road and far down the pass he saw
a mill beside the stream and the falling water of the dam, white in the
summer sunlight.

“Is that the mill?” he asked.

“Yes.”

“I do not remember it.”

“It was built since you were here. The old mill is farther down; much
below the pass.”

He spread the photostated military map out on the forest floor and
looked at it carefully. The old man looked over his shoulder. He was a
short and solid old man in a black peasant’s smock and gray iron-stiff
trousers and he wore rope-soled shoes. He was breathing heavily from the
climb and his hand rested on one of the two heavy packs they had been
carrying.

“Then you cannot see the bridge from here.”

“No,” the old man said. “This is the easy country of the pass where the
stream flows gently. Below, where the road turns out of sight in the
trees, it drops suddenly and there is a steep gorge——”

“I remember.”

“Across the gorge is the bridge.”

“And where are their posts?”

“There is a post at the mill that you see there.”

The young man, who was studying the country, took his glasses from the
pocket of his faded, khaki flannel shirt, wiped the lenses with a
handkerchief, screwed the eyepieces around until the boards of the mill
showed suddenly clearly and he saw the wooden bench beside the door; the
huge pile of sawdust that rose behind the open shed where the circular
saw was, and a stretch of the flume that brought the logs down from the
mountainside on the other bank of the stream. The stream showed clear
and smooth-looking in the glasses and, below the curl of the falling
water, the spray from the dam was blowing in the wind.

“There is no sentry.”

“There is smoke coming from the millhouse,” the old man said. “There are
also clothes hanging on a line.”

“I see them but I do not see any sentry.”